JAMES: Previously on
12 Monkeys...
She said Iwas Primary.
You are Primary.
Locked up for delusions
and voices in the head?
That sound like
anybody we know?
Jennifer Goines.
Yes, she's crazy, too.
She's notjust crazy. She's...
CASSIE: She’s what? Special?
We help it think. Primaries.
Living, breathing gears
in time’s wristwatch.
Tick tock.
JAMES: We know
why the Messengers
went back in time.
They’re destroying Primaries.
J EN N l FER: Collapsing time,
creating paradoxes.
No beginning. No end.
All of humanity destroyed.
CASSIE: We know one of
the Messengers’ targets.
A Primary named Kyle Slade.
New York City, 1970s.
PALLID MAN:
It's 1975, to be precise.
We sent two
of our Messengers there
after him.
Something else happen?
You're walking
through a Red Forest.
CASSIE: We’re going
on another trip
to see the Witness?
I can't wait to tell him
about how I've been taking
out your Messengers.
Eight down, fourto go.
(GUNSHOT)
Who are you?
Aaron?
(LIGHTNING CRACKLING)
(THUNDER RUMBLING)
You know, the skeptic in me
finds it hard to believe
that all this is
the result of the murder
of a few crazy people
back in time.
lt's notjust murder.
They're paradoxing a Primary,
removing a vital string
in the fabric of time.
lt's unwinding before
our eyes.
This is causality driven
insane.
Won't be long before
it will devour our past,
present and future.
Destroying all of mankind.
Hell on earth?
You're not going
all Biblical on me now,
are you, Kat?
We need to find
the next Primary,
stop the Messengers
from destroying them.
Well, then feast those
beautiful eyes on this.
De-con chamber.
You sure?
Cover me.
Hold, hold!
This is your problem.
You got no plan.
You rush down
that hallway, naked,
he's gonna get you.
God damn it!
(SHOUTS)
Got you. You're both dead.
Nice job, buddy.
You're supposed to be
watching my back, man.
You're high-fiving the enemy?
Dead means no talking.
Oh, man. lthink
lgot a flesh wound.
Avenge me, brother. (GROWLS)
What? We can't play outside.
We know where to find
the Primary in 1975.
Game over.
ls Cole going back
in time again?
Probably.
You going with him?
Nah.
I got a more importantjob.
You could've stopped
a lot of people
from dying before.
And you didn't.
I know you love me,
but it's notjust
about my future.
It's about everyone's.
KATARINA: Thanks to Dr. Railly
and Ms. Goines,
we have the name of another
of the Messengers' victims.
JAMES: Kyle Slade.
Died July the 2nd, 1975.
Slade was a drifter,
no permanent address,
believed to reside
near Greenwich Village.
Do we know how many
Messengers were sent back
to kill this guy?
There are four
unaccounted for.
But if they are consistent,
at least two assassins
were sent after Mr. Slade.
We believe it's these two men.
Unfortunately, there's
no security footage
of the others.
But there is something
that you should know.
This man, Kyle Slade,
was believed to
be "The Immortal."
A serial killer
responsible for
the murder and dismemberment
of at least 12 people
between 1974 and '75.
What?
Staff Sergeant Slade
was dishonorably discharged
from the US. Army
after allegedly butchering
several Viet Cong soldiers.
I'm supposed to
protect this guy?
How you prevent him
from being paradoxed
is up to you.
HOW do | find him?
Victoria Mason. The lmmortal's
12th and final victim.
The only one police
could identify.
The rest were indigents.
Murdered July 2nd, 1975.
(GRUNTS)
Same day Slade's body
was found.
In other words, paradoxed.
So I splinter in
before he finds Victoria.
You follow her to Slade,
wait till the Messengers come.
Then we take 'em out.
”We”?
You're all leap,
no look, little brother.
(CHUCKLES)
You're gonna get
yourself killed.
My hero.
It's either that or Jonesy
sends me back in time
to save your ass again.
You're crazy about me.
Just admit it.
What about the girl?
I strongly recommend
not getting involved.
You mean let her die.
I mean,
don't alter time any more
than we already have.
The temporal scanners
have been recalibrated.
I can put you at the proper
coordinates within seconds
of each other.
July 1st, 1975.
With that hair,
you're gonna fit right in.
Just try and stay out
of traffic this time.
You gotta be kidding me.
Initiate Splinter Sequence.
You are a real pain
in the ass.
Owl
Sedatives for a concussion?
My malpractice case
against you is growing
by leaps and bounds.
You need to rest
so you can recover.
Mmm. It's so warm.
(SIGHS)
Nope, not sleepy.
(EXHALES)
You know, as a former CEO of
a major biotech company,
I'm used to certain amenities.
This place is old.
And it smells.
It smells like old.
Probably haunted.
(FLOOR CLICKING SOFTLY)
It's definitely haunted.
You know, some people
think that ghosts
are just replays.
Traumatic events
recorded into
their surroundings.
Into time.
And there are the sedatives.
You don't believe
in ghosts, do you?
I don't.
You gotta open your mind, Doc,
before someone
opens it for you.
The coffee's not bad.
I'll stick with this.
This is good.
You ever had coffee?
WAITRESS: Refill?
Yeah.
Used to make coffee
all the time
when we were scavs.
That wasn't coffee.
What do you mean
it wasn't coffee,
what was it?
She's coming.
Seriously, what was it?
I'd love a refill.
Your friend there's
putting away flapjacks
like he's never had 'em
before.
Where we're from,
the pancakes are horrible.
Oh, yeah? Where are you from?
I'm from Jersey.
I do love a Jersey boy.
You like Jersey boys?
So, Victoria, what's, uh,
like fun, you know,
to do around here?
It's New York City, man.
Everything's fun
if you're doing it right.
(SIGHS) I know that look.
What look?
The look that says
you're about to father
another child
and change the course
of history.
Let's not get involved
with the locals, okay?
You're the authority?
BOY: Mommy!
VICTORIA: How are you?
Did you have fun with Emily?
Jones never said
she had a kid.
I know.
What's gonna happen to him
when she dies, huh?
Whatever already happened.
VICTORIA:
Here, let me fix that.
There you go.
Yes! Good man.
She's not gonna win
Mother of the Year.
Thanks,KennyI
Thank you.
See you tomorrow!
Ah!
(VICTORIA SCREAMING)
Shit.
That's our Primary.
Jesus Christ.
That's the guy we're
supposed to protect?
This is me looking
and not leaping.
That sitting right with you?
I don't like it
any more than you do,
but it's how it has to be.
We go changing things now,
we're gonna make it worse.
We don't wanna be here
any longer than we have to.
We? Or you?
It's not the plan, Cole.
(VICTORIA GASPING)
(SCREAMING)
JAMES: Hey, asshole.
(GRUNTS)
Ah!
(HIGH-PITCHED RINGING)
Something's changing!
(TIRES SCREECHING)
Looks like we got a Messenger.
Okay, okay.
So, you guys came here
from the future
to stop some guy
from killing me,
in order to stop the guys
who are trying to kill him?
Okay, that is some
Twilight Zone shit
right there.
Maybe honesty is not
the best policy here.
What about my son?
He's safer with your mother.
You're safer here.
Least until we find
the Messengers.
What are you doing?
You're a mother,
stay off of this shit.
Yeah? Look who's talking.
It's a side effect
from changing time.
(SCOFFS)
Why, because you saved me?
You just got a second chance.
Try not to waste it.
All the cocaine
she's been doing,
she's gonna be dead
in a month.
Little kid is better off.
The last person who
should be passing judgment
on parenting is you.
You gotta watch your mouth.
VVhathappened,happened.
Kyle's still out
there somewhere.
We gotta get to him
before they do.
All we got is his name,
and we know what
he looks like. That's it.
The cops.
We give them the name,
let them find him.
Piggyback off 'em.
I mean,
they have to look into it.
They're the cops.
Not in this time period.
Too much corruption.
Then we'll have to blend in.
You the guys from The Times?
JAMES: That's right.
Detective Damato.
This is Franklin.
Bill Margolis.
This is my associate,
Ethan Seki.
Why don't you step
into our office?
(SIGHS)
So, you said you had
some information
on the Immortal.
We know who he is.
Thatso?
And how exactly do
a couple of newshounds
come upon this information?
RAMSE: Can't tell you.
Have to protect our sources.
So, who is he?
Kyle Slade. Vietnam vet.
Did three tours,
came home last year.
Two weeks before you found
your first victim.
All right, pallies.
We'll look into it.
We want to ride along,
be there when you grab him.
That way,
we get our exclusive.
DAMATO: No way.
Can't have a couple
of ink-stained dipshits
tagging along on
a serial murder collar.
Thanks for the tip.
Oh, and you guys
have yourselves
a beautiful day, huh?
How about a peek
at the future?
I got an article here I wrote.
Goes to press in an hour.
(DAMATO READING)
Our names are all over this.
What, are you assholes
trying to blackmail us?
Just trying to help you
catch a killer.
All right.
Ifwe give you this exclusive,
this gets spiked or you do.
FRANKLIN:
000 just sent this over.
DAMATO:
Staff Sergeant Kyle Slade.
Survived six months
in a Viet Cong POW
camp until he escaped.
He slaughtered his captors,
using a machete to
hack off their limbs.
According to a psychologist,
Slade said that
voices in the jungle
told him to do it.
Declared Section Eight,
shipped back to the US.
Hasn't been seen since.
This guy's a one-man My Lai.
DAMATO: Let's put a
BOLO out on Slade.
(SIGHS)
(THUDDING)
(THUDDING LOUDLY)
(ELECTRICITY CRACKLING)
AARON: Cassie?
(CLATTERING)
Aaron?
DISPATCH: The suspect
we believe to be the killer
is holding a woman hostage.
All available units,
report to the scene.
(POLICE SIREN WAILING)
Officer Rollins.
Spotted your suspect
moving west on Lincoln.
When I approached,
he ran into this store.
Took the cashier hostage.
Anyone else in there?
ROLLINS: Don't think so.
He's threatening to kill her
ifwe don't leave the scene.
Call HNT,
we need a negotiator.
And get ESU down here.
Better reach out to
the Mayor's office, too,
we don't need any blowback.
Hey!
Cole!
Hey, get back here!
God damn it.
Hey!
Take one more step...
Easy.
I'm here to help you, Kyle.
How do you know my name?
I know all about you.
I know you're Primary.
(WHIMPERS)
And I know, last night,
a man from the future
tried to kill you.
The Messenger?
It's you. James Cole.
(WHIMPERS)
Why don't you put
that gun down
so we can talk, all right?
POLICEMAN: Move them back!
Back it up! Gotta keep
the whole street clear.
JAMES: We're coming out!
You'll be safe in jail, Kyle.
They can't get to you.
I've been waiting
for you, Cole.
I can take you
to the Witness now.
The Witness?
The one who gave birth
to the Army of the
Twelve Monkeys.
You want him. I've got him.
POLICEMAN: Go, go! Move!
Where is he?
I can take you right now.
Well, we don't have time. No.
Where is... Hey!
We don't have time for this!
Kyle! Tell me where he is!
Come on.
JAMES: Kyle!
DAMATO: Shit heel!
Hey! Back off.
I need to talkto him.
Put him in our car.
Thanks for the tip, Serpico,
but your exclusive ends here.
Hey, asshole!
I need to speak to him.
I got the itching for
a real nice obstruction
charge for you two.
I'll see you soon.
He knows where the Witness is.
What are you talking about?
Cole.
Don't do that.
Get in.
Don't do that!
That's a cop car.
(ENGINE STARTING)
Oh, I'm an idiot.
How is this possible?
They rescued me from the fire.
Nursed me back to health.
Don't worry. She's safe.
I'm not the enemy, Cass.
And neither are they.
Aaron?
We're all fighting
the same war,
just on different fronts.
These people,
they have powers
beyond our understanding.
Without them, I'd be dead.
Without them,
none of this
would've happened.
Not the plague,
not the fire...
Not Cole.
You betrayed us.
Everything I did was...
You did for me.
I know. I know.
I wish to God that
you'd stayed out of it.
I thought I was
gonna die in that fire.
I was just waiting
for the pain to stop.
In those final moments,
the only thing
I saw was you, Cass.
You were the only thing
that kept me going.
And the worst
part was thinking
that I was gonna die
without ever getting
the chance to tell you
that I'm sorry.
(SIREN WAILING)
(TIRES SCREECHING)
You sons of bitches!
JAMES: Guns down.
On the ground.
Now!
You want to tell me
what the hell you're doing?
Get in the car. You, too.
You're in some
real shit, paperboy.
Shut up.
Get inside.
JAMES: Don't look at me.
Get in the car.
Cole, our mission is
to protect the Primary.
What are you doing?
Kyle, can you take me to him?
Bronx River Avenue.
I can show you.
Hold on.
Hold on?
It's the Witness.
The guy behind
the apocalypse,
the anomalies.
If he's here,
we have to find him.
Cole, this guy,
he jerks off in his basement,
and he thinks about
hacking off limbs.
You wanna trust him now?
If there's even a chance that
we can find the Witness,
I have to take it.
We could end this
thing right now!
Not by going off half-cocked!
I got a kid.
Really? I haven't heard
that before.
You're just as crazy
as this piece of shit.
Idiot.
You don't listen.
You never listen!
You're all leap, no look!
You remember?
This was always my mission,
not yours.
(TIRES SCREECHING)
Cole!
(POLICE SIREN WAILING)
(POLICE SIREN BLARING)
Who did this?
Him! (GASPS)
Traveler.
How'd you find us?
Your friend left
something at the cafe.
He's with the Primary now?
Yeah.
Your boss, he's in deep shit.
The Witness?
Mmm-hmm.
If that's true,
you were wise not to
follow him, Traveler.
(GRUNTS)
1975 is as good a year
as any to die, Traveler.
(SCREAMS)
(PANTING)
(WHIMPERS)
(GRUNTS)
(GASPING)
(CHOKING)
(GASPS)
All right. You're okay?
Yeah.
I need to borrow
your car keys.
You need to get
the hell outta here.
Look at me.
You go home,
you take care of your boy.
Your life ain't
about you anymore.
(HELICOPTER WHIRRING)
Let's go.
KYLE: They said
Iwas crazy. In 'Nam.
Said that's what
the jungle does to a man.
I knew.
The war wasn't over there,
it was here.
Is that how you justify
butchering innocent people?
I didn't have a choice.
Those people
werejust like me.
They could hear the voices.
You're saying
they were Primary?
The Witness wants
to take 'em out,
bring down this whole
house of cards.
But you can't paradox 'em
if they're already dead.
What about the waitress?
Victoria. She wasn't Primary.
Just a means to an end.
I didn't want to hurt her,
but a soldier's got
to make tough choices.
You know.
You've heard of
Cyrus the Great?
King of Persia?
No.
He had an army,
The Immortals.
Warriors willing to
do whatever it took,
no matter how brutal.
That meant no attachments.
No wives, no kids, nothing.
Just the battle. Like us.
What battle?
AARON: There's only one true
enemy in this world.
Time itself.
I know you feel it too, Cass.
Hanging over you
like a shadow.
All those years as a doctor,
how much suffering
have you witnessed?
How many people have you seen
slip away before their time?
What do you want
from me, Aaron?
I want you to understand.
It doesn't have to be
that way anymore.
There's only one way
to undo the clock, Cass.
KYLE: The Witness
is destroying people like me.
The ones that keep time
from falling in on itself.
But we can't
hold it up forever.
Someday Atlas is gonna shrug.
And when that day comes,
this whole city
is gonna turn
into a ghost town
I've seen it.
Seen what?
A forest of blood.
It was like hell on earth.
AARON: It’s beautiful.
A place where time
no longer exists.
A place where you can be
with the one you love forever.
What could be more
important than that?
No.
No, it can't be that way.
It's the only way.
Don't you understand?
The Red Forest is
the only way to beat death!
KYLE: The Witness
wants to be immortal
in his timeless forest.
But can you imagine?
Destroying time itself
so everything that's left
is living and dying
in the same moment.
An eternal now.
Everything you've ever known,
anyone that you've ever loved.
There's no future, no past.
Forever red.
The Witness is here.
Careful.
For any curious cats.
Come on.
What did I tell you?
The Witness. In the flesh.
He came for me,
but I was smarter.
Careful, careful!
This has to be done right.
What the hell
did you do to him?
I needed help.
So, I sent up a flare.
Victoria.
That's why she was the only
identifiable victim.
I knew that you would
follow her through time
right to me.
I knew that you would
come here to finish
what I started.
Take down our enemy.
(GRUNTS)
Once it's done,
we can go home.
Home?
To the future. Together.
Neither of us belongs here.
DISPATCH: All units, stolen
undercover vehicle reported
on Bronx RiverAvenue.
Be advised,
suspect is Kyle Slade,
wanted for multiple homicides.
Respond Code 1.
Damato, en route.
(SIREN BLARING)
He's from there, too,
you know. The future.
The Witness is a Traveler
just like you.
He's been doing it far,
far longer.
He's got abilities,
technology, way beyond yours.
He can get inside your head.
But he's just a man.
And a man can be killed.
(TIRES SCREECHING)
(KYLE GRUNTS)
You see this?
He came here to
kill me with this,
his dagger made of bone.
It's my bone that
they dig up in the future.
Cole, you have to kill
the Witness with this.
Time wants you to do it,
needs you to do it.
It has to be you.
(SHUDDERED BREATHING)
I've seen you before.
You're not the Witness.
Ow.
(BREATHING SHAKILY)
You're not Aaron.
No.
(EXHALES)
You're the Witness.
Perhaps I've chosen
the wrong way
to convince you.
(GASPS)
This. This is the face
you prefer?
(GULPS)
(GASPS)
There you are, birthday girl!
One too many Bombay Breezes
for this one.
Okay, let's get you back
to the room
before you ralph
all over the marble.
You okay?
Sleep walk much?
(EXHALES)
Found you down here
going full Nell.
What's going on?
The Witness was here.
He's a Messenger.
The other one.
They come in pairs.
They're like hitmen
sent through time to
take out people like you.
You're wrong.
I'm too important.
The Witness wanted
to do me personally,
but I saw him coming.
Just like I knew that
you would come here.
Do it!
God!
Come on!
Take the dagger
and kill The Witness!
It is why I brought you here,
it is your fate to do this!
(CLICKS)
(WHISTLES)
Hey, Cole.
Let's do both of these guys
and get the hell outta here.
What's he doing here?
JAMES: Easy.
We're all on the same side.
Are we?
Because I am seriously
starting to doubt
your commitment, man!
Put your gun down!
You first.
No. No.
No,no,no,no!
This is not how this is
supposed to go.
It is supposed to be
you and me.
Blaze of glory into the future
and he is not a part of it!
DAMATO: Freeze!
Hands in the air!
Ramse, down!
(GRUNTING)
You're not worthy!
(GUNSHOT)
(CLICKING)
You're not worthy.
You're just like the others.
You were meant to protect me.
Only from a paradox.
(CHUCKLES)
I'm the Immortal.
I'm not supposed to die.
Everybody dies.
(GUNSHOT)
You're not safe here anymore,
especially around me.
You need to find
someplace else
to stay for a while.
Some place I don't know about.
If the Witness can find me,
he can find you, too.
Okay. Please know that
I appreciate the irony
of what I'm about to say,
but what if it was
all in your head?
We can't take that chance.
“mumm.
Then if it was real,
that means he's scared, right?
Of us!
I mean, whatever we're doing,
this is working, right?
We have to go Monkey hunting.
Okay, what's the natural
predator of the monkey?
Hyena! (GRUNTS)
Like a pack of hyenas!
We'll take the fight
to them, Cassie!
I don't know what kind
of fight I have in me.
(SIGHS)
What did he say to you?
He, um...
He told me
he wants to destroy time.
So there'd be no more death.
He made it sound
almost beautiful.
Well, it'S not.
Death is, like, everything.
It's the time clock
that makes us better.
Makes us love harder.
I don't know.
lthink it's, like,
maybe what makes us human.
KATARINA: Preventing
the paradox has caused
the temporal storms to recede.
We reversed
some of the damage.
What's that mean?
Means you did good, son.
I was out for blood
back there.
I know I almost
got you killed.
I just thought
we could get him, so,
I did what I always do.
Rush in.
Anyway, I'm sorry.
It's all right.
I used to think
you were insane.
(CHUCKLES)
I realize it's something
else, right?
Something in here.
Never gonna change
and it shouldn't.
I think one of these days
it's gonna help us
outta this mess.
Until then, somebody's
gotta have your back.
Listen, man.
You know I love...
Oh, what are you doing?
What?
You don't say that.
Say what?
You never say that.
I was gonna say I love
whiskey and we should go
find some and drink it.
No, you weren't.
You were gonna declare...
Yeah.
...your undying
love for me, brother.
Don't flatter yourself,
all right?
I heard you!
You're emotional right now.
I'm not being emotional.
You're being an asshole.
(BOTH LAUGHING)
Come on.
Me, too.
Jennifer?
(SIGHS)
(GASPS)